okay the Acoustics in the room are such
that we all need to be very quiet except
for one person who's talking or El it's
going to be very hard to hear but thank
you for coming out tonight to hear about
the plan of conservation development and
it's a it's certainly a pleasure to be
here with the new community Senior
Center to give the presentation ER was
working hard yesterday trying to get it
all working and it is least it appears
to be so far it's it's in John's hands
now but we'll go from there we've got
some water and cookies please eat eat
lots of cookies because otherwise I'll
take them home finish them and I'll do
even more laps without the L um
restrooms over here if you don't know it
and that's uh we've got plenty of exits
in the event of some kind of an
emergency to go out but again thank you
I I wanted to give an update to the
community
on all the surveys you know we had like
200 and some people fill out a survey
and give us input and I thought it was
kind to let people know what was going
on with that there was a couple other
things that I didn't want to wait until
we're done with the plan to get get
feedback
from so this is this is a session for
you we can ask questions I don't want to
be here all night I don't think we will
but uh
certainly we're interested in your
feedback make sure that there's
something that you think we're not
hitting on right and with that I'll turn
that over to our town planner John
Kowski and and he'll take you through
the
presentation hi everybody um so for
folks I haven't met in person um I'm
John gusowski Tom working with the town
for about um a year now um and for the
um folks on Planning and Zoning it it
this is me in actual three dimensions um
rather than just on on a zoom screen so
I do I do exist in in real life um so
we're here as as um Jed said to talk a
little bit about the planet conservation
and development um we're at about I
don't know around the halfway point of
of our plan um it's by no means a done
deal it's it's still evolving we're
still writing it um and so this is just
a point to check in with the public let
you know sort of how we got to where we
are and and what's ahead um first a
little bit about what a plan of
conservation development is this is a
document that is mandated by um the
state of Connecticut Connecticut General
statutes um that basically requires
every municipality in the state at least
every 10 years to basically update a
master plan and it is a task that's
assigned specifically to uh the Planning
Commission in this case endover like
many towns has a joint Planning and
Zoning commission but it's actually a
separate function so the the plan is
charged to the Planning Commission to
basically come up with a master plan for
the development and the conservation of
all manner of things in town and there's
a list here of certain things that have
to be considered things like Recreation
utilities Public Safety affordable
housing energy conservation open space
um all of these things are required by
the state
statute
um from a practical standpoint obviously
there's a mandate that the town has to
do it and if the town does not um it is
at risk of losing um discretionary State
funds so grants of the type that help us
buy open space or help us build Trails
um or help us extend sidewalk networks
um all of those things are basically
tied to the town completion and update
of its plan so it it absolutely removes
the town um to complete it beyond that
there's a couple of ways that a plan of
conservation and development is used by
municipalities um every time the town
makes a significant investment Municipal
Improvement whether that's um building a
new road extending a water line building
a school doing renovations to a school
buying a piece of open space selling
land for tax purposes um all of those MP
simple transactions if you will are
statutory required to be referred to the
Planning Commission and asked the
question does this move does this
acquisition does this sale does this
Improvement meet the goals of the plan
of conservation and development and the
Planning Commission basically has to you
know look through their plan and say yep
we're interested in buying this piece of
open space we definitely support it if
the Planning Commission finds that that
Municipal investment does not meet the
plan of ation and development it
essentially gets a veto over that um
over that Municipal investment or
Municipal Improvement that would then
require a town like andov which has
which is a town meeting
Town yeah um to basically override that
veto by a two3 majority um so plan of
conservation development in many ways is
sort of a a a check against um you know
misallocating Municipal funds or or
misdirecting uh
Investments um but on the positive side
it can also be used to forward goals so
if the town expresses a specific goal we
want to preserve this this area of town
or we want to develop Community Center
here if it's in the plan of conservation
development it can then be used and
really strengthen a Grant application um
a request for state federal nonprofit
Foundation funds um because it clearly
expresses the town's goal in support of
um that that
project in addition sort of more of a m
bus uh thing the town's zoning rules the
zoning regulations are explicitly meant
to deliver upon the goals of the plan of
conservation and development so for
instance if the town Expresses in the
plan that we wish to expand housing
opportunities through accessory dwelling
units through accessory apartments or or
you know Granny flat or something like
that the zoning regulations are meant to
reflect that um and so every time the
planning zoning commission sort of opens
up the zoning regulations for Amendment
or for revision they also must check
against the plan of conservation
development to make sure that we're
delivering upon the goals that are
expressed in that document um and I
should also yeah there's plenty of SE um
and also you know obviously the
Acoustics are bad but please feel free
to interrupt with with questions this is
not a super formal process um at all um
and then and then finally just
philosophically the the plan
conservation development is meant to be
a state a vision document that basically
says this is where we are this is where
we want to go over the next 10 years and
this is how we're going to get there and
ideally it should it should really
influence a lot of town decision making
at an administrative level at a
regulatory level at an investment level
and it is sort of ideally the road map
for the town's next 10
years um despite the fact that the state
mandates this plan that has you know all
kind of all kinds of elements in it
there actually is no mandated process
for how you get to your plan of
conservation and development and every
town is free and and very frequently
takes advantage of that freedom to take
their own path in developing the plan um
in the course in uh the case of
Andover it was decided again because it
is a creature of the Planning and Zoning
commission the Planning Commission um
the the writing and the and the guidance
of this of this plan development is
being managed essentially in the plan in
the Planning and Zoning commission
itself um with guidance from uh Eric as
Town manager and myself as Town planner
to help shape this document on behalf of
the commission um we have the current
plan which is a 2015 plan it expires I
think I don't know mid year um next year
mid
2025 um and so we are basically taking
that as um our basis of operations and
sort of our basis of of philos
and sort of building from there sort of
taking a look at the goals we
established almost 10 years ago saying
you know how have we accomplished um you
know how we met these goals how have we
achieved some of these things what
things have dropped away and you think
back 10 years ago it's it's hard to
think back more than four years ago
because Co seemed to have changed
everything changed everything about you
know how we live how we work how we you
know interrelate how we communicate how
you know towns picture themselves um and
and so a lot has a lot has changed even
in the last half decade um so it's it's
very much worth revisiting so we take a
look at where we've been over the last
10 years again not only how we've done
in delivering on the goals of the last
plan but how we changed how is our
demographic profile changed how is our
development makeup you know where have
we built where have we preserved um what
things have been improved what things
have been um
eliminated um we are also checking
against uh the state the state has a
plan a and development um it's referred
to as the state conservation and
development policies plan they've
established um six responsible growth
principles um which are are basically
smart growth principles um as as you
know the the jargon was maybe 20 years
ago but it's basically you know Focus
development on areas where you've got
infrastructure where you have major
transportation corridors where you have
sewer water population centers those
should be the places that grow first uh
most our natural areas should be
preserved particularly environmentally
sensitive areas um and we should try to
grow in a way that that respects um
Equity the environment as well as uh
Economic Opportunity so the state
establishes those principles and when we
write our plan and we we sort of develop
our approach it should ideally reflect
those State principles as well in
addition to local
priorities in determining what the local
priorities are we've done a couple of we
did uh a community survey that Jed um
responded to and we had actually a very
good turn up I I don't remember the the
number of responses exactly we'll take a
look in a second um but for a for a town
of and over size it was it was um a very
good
representation and again this and I'm
sure many of you took the survey um so
you know what we were asking we asked
about basically priorities what are your
conservation priorities what are your
development priorities what are things
you're looking forward to over the next
10 years what are things you're
concerned about um and and basically to
try to help the Planning and Zoning
commission identify where the priority
areas
are um as well as looking at existing
town plans uh there was a town
um uh Capital Improvements plan A couple
of years ago that we we were basically
um using and building off of and then um
the part that we are just about to
really ramp up is to have uh
individualized conversations with
stakeholder groups about specific things
and I know the members of the
conservation commissioner here we're
going to have a detailed uh cons uh
conversation about conservation
priorities areas of Tom we want to
preserve things that we've already
preserve that we need to do a better job
of maintaining um that sort of thing and
then we're going to do the same with the
economic development commission um and
other other stakeholder groups in town
and have these individualized
conversations again over the next you
know 6 to n months or
so so that's where we are in the process
I'll go a little bit about the
demographics again you are all residents
and involved citizens here so none of
this should be terribly surprising um to
people who have lived in Ando for for
any length of time um most of our data
comes from the 2020 census which was the
most recent desal census we have some
data from the American Community survey
which is a a 5year sort of sliding
window of statistical analysis um but
the 100% count data comes from is
already a couple of years old so not ly
um hand over is um vast majority um
non-hispanic white Caucasian uh almost
90% with with small um groups of of
different minority
groups um our population Trends have
been slightly trending down um the top
uh show the top graph shows us uh
population estimates um over the last
well the 10 over the last 10 years that
ended in 20 so you see from 2010 to 2020
there was a slight decline it you know
it it looks more precipitous than it
actually is if you look at the chart at
the top we're only talking about a
couple hundred people um or what the top
3350 and so we're really only talking a
couple of dozen people that that you
know have have moved in or out over the
last couple of um over the last decade
or so the bottom chart shows you the
population projections this is by no
means um written in Stone It Is by no
means our our immutable fate but again
it is based on you know State
statistical analysis um and sees in and
over like a lot of similar rural
communities in Connecticut a slight drop
off of population over the next 15 years
or so um so according to the state again
um we're looking like our our recent
population seems to have peaked at
around 3500 and we're going to be
declining you know possibly below 3,00
over the next 15 years but again this is
not written in stone these projections
were done um before Co um and again A
lot has changed and and we've seen you
know Andover is not the same as say
Boise Idaho which saw a crazy boom
because of Co people escaping you know
other other bigger cities and and
finding sort of a a CO you know work
from home type payment uh you know a lot
of the smaller towns in Connecticut saw
that s of Mo as well so the these
projections are a little bit but before
you leave that SL the last 3 years the
population in Andover has been about the
same might be going up a little bit
might be down a little bit but it has
certainly leveled off because when I
started looking at the declining
projections I said W this is bad news
for us
um and it's it's not necessarily that
way and it could be you know there's
there's even people thinking that due to
climate change migration of the
population from the Sou is going to
start moving back and forth again and
that sort of thing so in this slide you
know the the offal projections I think
they'll be updated at some point to say
show a different picture than what we
got there but I was happy to see that
our population is not declining and uh
we're holding our own which I thought
was good
news um and again the the the raw
numbers are the differences are
extremely small you know It's a Small
Town the difference of a couple of dozen
people here and there really makes a
significant difference um so we won we
won't get too hung up on the on the
numbers age distribution again not a
particular surprise necessarily to
anyone who has
um lived in Anover for a while um the
age the age group distributions um on
the bottom chart the the light blue is
back in 2000 the dark blue is in 2020 so
you see the the bars that get taller get
darker our age group so you can see that
Andover is is Shifting in terms of its
age that it's the population over 45
over 55 over 65 is creeping up as a
percentage of the population again not a
star um ktic is aging Small Town
Connecticut is aging um however there
are you know some some positives if you
look uh between 2010 and 2020 our you
know our baby population to five
population ticked up a little bit um so
you know families aren't abandoning end
over in drills um but we are aging in
our in our
um household demographics reflect that
specifically we have a number of small
households the the chart over on the
left shows you um household by size and
so if you combine one person household
and two person households um we're
looking at over 60% of the town is
either one or two person households
relatively small for a town that has
such a that is so dependent on you know
relatively large lot relatively large
house single family um housing um and
that you know we have we have relatively
big houses um and you can see that the
um I'm sorry uh that you know we have
relatively sizable houses three and four
bedroom units I think that might be on
our next slide um but our household
sizes again there's there's sort of a
disconnect there um our household size
is surprisingly stable um it's both both
larger than Connecticut and and um T
County in general and um T County
household sizes are actually getting a
little bit smaller and over been
relatively
stable and again the top chart shows you
basically our um household type or I'm
sorry our housing type uh where we
basically have the the long line single
family detach again not a surprise I
would be I would be shocked if anyone
here lived in a 20 apartment building
somewhere in hand I don't know if there
are um but we you know we live in single
family houses but we have increasingly
um small household
sizes um a little bit of our employment
and income end over is relatively well
to do compared to T County and certainly
compared to the state of Connecticut um
where a median income uh for a um
household is just about $100,000 get
that's a I believe that's a 2020
statistic um our unemployment rate is is
quite low particularly relative to T
County and the state um but most of the
people who are
employed um most and over residents who
are employed are employed elsewhere so
the the map shows you um people coming
into and over the dark green is people
coming into and over to work the light
GRE is people leaving and over to work
so vast majority of people are working
elsewh
um so it's you know again reflective of
of a veteran Community um and really
only about 70 people Eric and 69 of his
closest friends both live and work in
and um so we conducted a survey as we
said um we put this ad in the um
deliveries and in uh local newsletters
and Publications hopefully people got a
chance to see this hopefully you clicked
on the on the link the QR code um again
to get to get feedback um so we had over
230 people fill this out um which again
with an adult population and and over
you know somewhere under 3,000 people um
it's it's a decent you know survey
sample um again uh so we asked some
basic questions you live a working
Handover um basically as we saw with
that with that with that job migration
map most of the people responded were
either living in and over working in
another town or
retired not that many people um again
living and working in Andover so we then
we asked um and you're not going to get
to see all of the all of the responses
here but we basically asked people when
it came to Economic Development
priorities where would we like to see
where would we welcome Economic
Development some of the choices were no
major changes to Business Development
more retail on on Route Six including
things like groceries and um more
service Professional Medical along Route
six more restaurants along Route 6 more
small businesses and homebased
businesses scattered around town where
the where the homes are um more visitor
based businesses to sort of take
advantage of the the Hot River Trail and
and some of the the linear um
resources or to focus on growing small
businesses um and we ask people to rank
so um you know your top priority is a
one your bottom priority is a seven the
way that this um gets inverted so so it
makes a little bit more sense on the map
or on on the graph is the longest Bars
were the most popular the longest Bars
were the ones that people ranked the
highest and so um you know nothing was
was Far Away the the favorite but you
know people preferred retail options um
and more restaurant options those were
the two popular ones along the St with
you know sort of mixed support for the
other options and if if you look back at
previous plans of conservation and
development um that question has been
asked in that basic form at least four
times in the last 40 years in this year
is exactly what's been said each time is
that what people are looking for you
know in terms of commercial development
is the things they use they want to see
the grocery stores and they want to see
the stores and the things they actually
want to use not necessarily business for
the sake of business in the tax Bas but
business because they want to luse them
so this is the results you know as you
survey people seem to be the same for
the last 30 40
years um then we ask people about
housing um and if we thought if you
thought that more housing options were
needed uh what types of um people are
are in need of this um additional
housing options again the longest Bars
were the most popular
responses this was check all that appli
so um you know you could you could check
all the options if you wanted so so the
difference is um stand out so young
families were um young families and then
seniors were easily the most popular um
and Then followed by Young professionals
teachers firefighters other sort of
essential in town workers people that
can't work outside of town because of um
the nature of the job and then there was
a a small group again about 25% that
said yeah we're okay for housing but um
this this again I think reflects what we
see in in a number of small towns like
Handover that seniors young families are
are are critically
um in need of of more housing
options then we ask okay given that what
kind of housing would be appropriate for
the people that need it but would make
sense in and over for andover's um
condition and again check all that appli
so so people could in theory um choose a
whole bunch of them unsurprisingly
single family residences that's what's
in Andover that's what feels like
Andover that's been our development
pattern and for the most part that's
what people thought should be continued
however there was still support uh for
single family residences with accessory
Apartments which is something that is
allowed in the zoning um that we hope
that people will start to take more and
more advantage of with some support for
two families and duplexes um and then
town houses the other options three four
family um and multif family didn't quite
have the same sort of support but so
again you know most of us in Andover are
home owners single family detached
houses we love it here we're comfortable
here we like to see that sort of
development and so unsurprisingly to
sort of see a path forward and and over
that sort of um would be would be a
preferred
option then we asked about uh Community
resilience and sustainability looking at
some potentially environmental factors
that may um encounter uh and over over
the next 10 years and how should we how
should we rank these again this was
ranked top priority low priority the
longest Bars were the largest responses
the the most popular response in this
was upgrading our roads our bridges our
CTS um to basically respond to
increasing storm frequency and intensity
more flooding events um more
environmental damage to our our road
instructure um was was something that
was truly very very important um
upgrading our power data infrastructure
and then making sure handovers Road
network was friendly to bicycle and
pedestrian travel um that's the yellow
one um we're also relatively relatively
popular stood up a little bit among sort
of the the noise of the others which
included um Alternative Energy
infrastructure things like solar um
Community
Gardens um discouraging new construction
uh in flood plane areas or flood prone
areas um and investing in um uh creating
access so all of those were kind of
mixed results but definitely people saw
roads Bridges culs and things like that
as as something that the town should be
spending um it's money on we looked at
Natural Resources um again asking the
same questions rank the priorities
longest bars are the are the um the most
popular the most popular being focus on
our Trails connecting um our Trail
systems both in the town and to um other
Town Trail systems so we have a real
Network some of the other popular ones
we're focusing on and over Lake water
quality issues um investing in
stewardship um and care of the lands
that we already have there are a lot of
open space there a lot of of of
preserved Forest land in town making
sure that that gets taken care of is is
something that frequently gets sort of
Left Behind even after a property is is
preserved um and then looking at things
like investing in active Recreation and
passive Recreation um also had had some
support but um definitely this is a this
is a trail
to and we may thank Eric for loting on
that one probably 40 or 50
times uh so so again we look at the long
range plan that was that was done a
couple of years ago um we basically put
this question back out there um these
were the priorities that were identified
in the long range plan and we want to
see where people fell out on that and
think this was a basically a 1 through
five do you agree uh strongly agree
agree neutral disagree strongly disagree
um and of the of the five priorities of
the long range planning um study the one
that r easily the highest the weighted
average was that the town should
actively Market available and
undeveloped commercial land along Route
Six which again you know sort of fits
with the the fact that people seem to
recognize you know obviously so that
route 6 is sort of the best opportunity
for economic development of the type
that would be suitable for Handover um
and and people want more of it
particularly the retail service um type
um
uses that was as the as the most most um
the strongest agreement on the long
range
planet and then we asked a little bit
about town government itself um the
services that are provided by the town
the schools the transfer station General
government um Senior
Services Public Works um and and which
people supported um what's what's
interesting um so this was available
online uh obviously Survey Monkey
hopefully most of you filled it out
there we also had um many many hard
copies available um at the Town Hall at
the library um for people to fill out a
hard copy who didn't want to you know
use the computer um the majority of
people who filled out the survey online
um were had strong support for um
everyone had pretty strong support for
public works but there was a much
stronger um support for Andover public
school system on the online survey in
the hard copy survey there was um more
uh strength support for Services for
Seniors um so we we got a little bit of
a demographic microcosm um based on
based on the method of filling up the
survey but um overall schools are seen
as are seen as very very important
public works again roads Bridges culs
things like that um and then Services
for Seniors General government services
things like you know Tax Collectors the
clerk the um hunting and Zoning are all
um seen as as particularly important as
well
we asked a little bit about um concerns
uh things we should be worried about a
little bit or or thinking about um
relative to end overs future we asked a
number of things things like climate
change changing demographics loss of
sense of character aging infrastructure
overdevelopment of our natural resources
housing um pattern slow economic growth
crime affability all of those
things uh again a very concerned to not
at all concern basically a 1 through
five we gave a weighted average and the
two highest ranking concerns are aging
infrastructure again so we saw that with
roads Bridges cirs as well as
affordability of living in Andover um
which is I
think um I don't know it's it's it's
impressive and it's thoughtful
particularly because Andover is a town
of home ownership and everyone living
here most everyone who filled out the
survey owns their own house and is in a
you know in a relatively stable
hopefully housing condition but still
recognizes that housing is a challenge
housing is getting more affordable it is
um an increasing challenge particularly
for empty nesters who are maybe taking
care of a bigger house with with a lot
of taxes with we a lot of utilities
would like an opportunity to downsize
but are but also stay in town um we see
a lot of that reflected in in um
concerns about affordability of public
living we then as a couple of open-ended
questions the first question was what is
something you hope will happen in and
over the next 10 years and people were
all across the board um all a variety of
things and and thanks to the the
thoughtful and diligent sorting through
Jed went through every open-ended
response and categorized them about you
know some people might say you know you
know expense of government services some
people might say taxes those are kind of
the same thing and Jed took some of
these divers responses and and
categorize them and so um among our top
I don't know this is top eight or nine
um hopes are growth of appropriate
businesses varieties of housing
particularly affordable housing a growth
in our population particularly young um
roads and Bridge improvements safe rural
community lower taxes Town Center light
uh enforcement um several people called
out the plaza complete streets uh and
then more Town activities in par
creation these are these are hopes and
so these were you know again we had over
230 responses most people did fill out
the sort of open-ended responses and so
these did stand out uh as as common uh
respones on that before you go the uh
you we talk before about people wanting
to see Economic Development growth in
and over and it came through there
number one item here on on your hope
what do you hope for we're hoping for
more economic development of the things
that was tied into that
that was that an awful lot of the people
said we want Economic Development so
that it lowers the lowers our taxes and
we can afford to stay here and one of
the things that that I learned from
going through the Dollar General and
thinking that that was going to provide
the taxes that would make everything
great is that the economic development
is not going to solve that problem and
uh I don't know the answer is but the
Dollar General didn't produce wasn't
responsible for lowering the tax rate in
town that you might have thought it was
going to so if you if you think a little
economic growth by having
rest office whatever it want is going to
solve all our
problems and I mean so to certain extent
I we hope that that's understood and and
somewhat reflected in in responses that
again you
know relatively small you know a Dollar
General is 5,000 ft it's you know it's a
building it's a commercial building it
doesn't generate kids but it's it's not
you know Microsoft World Headquarters
it's not a billion building it's not
going to really move the needle
necessarily on on the grand list um but
it does provide immediate service and
again people in the survey clearly
stated that they want those Services
they want those vences stores phes
doctor's offices things like that really
I think more about more about
convenience and lifestyle than it is
about about taxes I have a question yeah
if there were an average five more
businesses to come into a
pharmacy another restaurant and three
others would that have a big impact on
the taxes in our town overall if they
were that popular to bring in funding to
lower our
taxes I I may defer this to to air up a
little bit I mean a lot depends on
exactly how big and expensive these
buildings are because essentially I mean
a grand list is basically the value of
taxable property and and so if your if
your house is worth you know $300,000 a
Dollar General might be worth $800,000
so it's basically the equivalent and I'm
making these numbers up but it's
basically equivalent of 2 and a half
houses um
so it doesn't NE that much um it would
help but I don't think it's a game
changer um it would you know it would
take something like $50 generals to to
move the bill rate down a point or two
you know so again kind of making up the
numbers but but that's the order of magn
talking about yeah so the Dollar General
brings in roughly 40,000 a year in taxes
so one of the things we did a while
when I was still on the planning Z is we
did a quick study with the old uh Town
planner guy that was helping us out Bill
Warner like what if scenarios and so the
first one we posed is what does it take
the businesses that we have and those
types of businesses to generate a
noticeable difference in the mill rate
say
10% um and it worked out somewhere
around we'd have to have about 35
endover plazas to make a 10% difference
and we took about 40 of the gas
stations and that's the range of things
that would make a noticeable
difference
um you know I mean
unfortunately the types of
businesses that would generate lots of
revenue for a town like
Handover tend to be very undesirable
businesses like the infusion station
which everybody uh was beamly opposed a
trash energy plant those are things that
you know would make a significant
difference in the mill rate in taxation
but also have enormous negatives is that
because Anover is just a small
demographic
size that to expect to have 15 or 20
kind of drown out what really is to
bring I'm not sure we have the
commercial real estate to
even putot on that many more businesses
but I mean I look at it and say
something that's going to make a mo a
noticeable difference in your tax
dollars is going to look something like
the burlin turnback not like rout six as
it is today um if that's what everybody
wants then you know that's what the town
pursues but that's that's never been
really what people
want and and in a lot of ways that's
precisely what this exercise is about is
is to determine what that balance is
because again we call this the plan of
conservation and development and so you
know what in town is important for for
preservation and one of those things
that's important for preservation is the
sense of andle and what kind of town
this feels like and the reason that you
have all chosen to live here or or stay
here if you have never been born here
um those things that make up hand over
are the things that we want to protect
that said we are also concerned about
Rising prices and and convenience and
things like that and so where where do
we fit along that line what how much do
we develop before it stops feeling like
hand over um and that's that's the
purpose of this plan so when we ask
people the same question yes go ahead um
I'm just wondering if you allow
apartments and low cost housing and more
housing is that going to have an effect
on utilities of the water
and um I the answer as with most things
is it depends um I mean where you know
Andover is dependent on private Wells
private SE system um and there are for
any development um whether it's a single
family residence whether it's an
apartment has to go through a fairly
rigorous review process to the
Department of Public Health possibly
even D to make sure that it's not
compromising public health and safety in
in the surrounding area
so it it you know a septic septic
systems are frankly overdesigned um in
Connecticut we are extremely
conservative in the way we design our
septic system so properly designed
properly installed a septic system even
even an apartment even a large
apartment should not affect
environmental conditions um and if you
have a large scale public water supply a
community water system that would serve
a department um that needs to go through
Department of Public Health also to
basically do all kinds of field testing
groundwater groundwater testing before
anyone can get a um a community water
system license they basically to monitor
groundwater levels over the course of a
year or more um to make sure that the
the the water draw for the new use does
not negatively affect the the the
neighbors and within the the oper with
the area it's not to say that nothing
ever changes and no one is ever affected
but we have a lot of environmental
safeguards in place to make sure that we
only build what the what the ground
because we rely on the ground ground for
ground water ground for waste
renovation only what the ground can can
tolerate we hope um but yeah there are
systems in place it should be protected
but I I can't say that it never ever
ever happens um and again you know we're
in a time of a changing climate are
we're we're wetter and more intense at
times we are drier at times we have
droughts and
so there's there's complicating factors
so sometimes you know apartment building
could get approved and built when we
just happen to be in a threeyear drop
cycle and people's you know Wells are
not yelding what they used to it's very
easy to to point your finger at the at
the apartments and say ah they Qui water
but the fact is we're just in a drought
so
it's it's a complicated answer but but
we have safeguards in place that it
shouldn't it should um we maybe can add
that to one of our concerns which was
the question we asked and again thanks
to J for were summarizing a lot of these
um again talk about High Cost of Living
and taxes were probably the most um uh
comment crime was mentioned frequently
despite the fact that if I'm going to go
back just a couple um crime and end over
one of the concerns we asked about was
actually quite low most people didn't
have like very high concern but it did
show up in um the open-ended responses
people were didn't mention crime um and
a lot of that I think there was a lot of
like speeding like that also um you know
so Public Public Safety sort of broadly
defined losing our residents again
people moving out particularly the young
people um people are concerned about
growth um as well as as the small town
character loss that that may go along
with that school spending um conversely
we had a lot number of people worryed
about too much growth unsurprisingly we
had more people we had other people
concerned about not enough growth so um
that that may indicate that kind of
headed in the right track if if people
on both sides of the of the growth curve
are are equally upset um more uh
affordable housing um and then and then
speeding and road safety um several
people uh particularly the handri
responses all know had some concerns
about about the threat of roundabouts in
town so kind before you go on there you
know when when everybody's concerned
about the high cost of living in
Handover you there were there were
certainly a lot of seniors said you know
High Cost of Living in Andover is
difficult for us there were a bunch of
folks you know who talked about Andover
being a
fairly wealthy town if you will you know
the uh the median salary is up there
pretty good for the household income
there's a lot of people that were saying
we're willing to pay more taxes we want
to pay more taxes to help it down so you
know and it's certainly not a planning Z
the thing that the senior organization
can do is look at how do we give a
little tax break to the seniors to allow
those folks that to pay more taxes build
up you for for uh funding the school you
know we we saw that uh that chart that
shows the zero to 5y old kids is
starting to grow a little bit that's
great
news the downside is you know each one
of those kids that goes to school you
know raises raises the cost of Education
it's great news but it makes the number
one problem worse in that it's getting
more so all of it's kind of
uh on both sides of the issue which
which kind of led me to the conclusion
that maybe we were doing things okay we
had the question about you know is we
are we going to have too many too many
houses
that um tax our water and sewer the
septic and that kind of thing
I'm happy if we could get a few more
houses you know especially to beat the
affordable housing rules but but the
population projections were dropping off
you know you don't want that I don't
think it's going to turn around and
we're going to be the thriving
Metropolis but we ought to be holding
our own and that's going to C that that
will require us to build more housing
more affordable housing not low income
housing but affordable for the uh you
know the average worker or the retire we
to go be able to go record to
SP um then just a little bit of
demographics and and unfortunately we
did not ask people's names we didn't ask
for people's emails which is unfortunate
because if if Jed is saying more people
were willing to to pay more we could
have match those people up and give the
name
to we uh just ask again demographic
questions um how what's what's your age
and what's interesting again about
230 or so people filled this out
but the the mix was pretty good it was
pretty reflective of what actually is in
um Ando we had most people were between
um 45 and 69 big chunks with with
significant um population uh from 30 to
45 and then over 70 but and again if you
remember sort of the the the demographic
curve it pretty much reflects um the
adult population in handle so I think we
had we had a pretty good representative
sample again do you own or rent your
home not surprisingly we are a home
ownership um uh community and then
household income again reflecting um
most people were um above the the
75,000 um you know significant numbers
above 100,000 150 uh reflecting and
overs um demographics that we see okay
all of that um is is prologue and I'll
continue to buzz on I want to take
people um whole evening here but taking
all of that we had a conversation in the
Planning and Zoning commission about the
kind of Handover that we wanted to see
going forward and we spent a couple of
months working on this and basically
came up with the vision statement that
will guide the whole plan of
conservation and development and with
your Indulgence I'm going to read it um
because it's important to to hear I
think out loud and hear the kind of and
over we want to see the town Andor
Planning Commission and developing this
update to the 2015 plan of conservation
and development is Guided by a deep
commitment to conserving and enhancing
the historic rural atmosphere of Andover
and by the intent to promote actions and
policies that will encourage a safe
connected and sustainable Community
where wider opportunities are available
to
all a fundamentally rural agricultural
Nature has defined the community of
endover for centuries and a continues to
be a critical component of the town's
self-identity as it faces the next
decade making investments in
conservation of forests Farms Trail
systems and Open Spaces will help
reinforce reinforce this rural Tradition
at the same time certain elements of
change must be acknowledged and used to
guide appropriate growth an aging
population limited housing and
Commercial diversity continued needs for
infrastructure and investment and a
changing climate also demand proactive
Clans and active
responses we envision in Andover that
provides housing educational
recreational and Civic opportunities
that maintain the communities excellent
quality of life we envision an Handover
that strives to create more affordable
housing to welcome a wider variety of
new residents and households and ensures
opportunities for residents to thrive
throughout their life
stages we envision an Handover that
safeguards the Integrity of our natural
agricultural resources through
sustainable
conservation we envision economic
development that takes advantage of
major transportation and Trail corridors
that serves the economic needs of the
community and is scaled to fit within
the spirit and pace of
Andover we envision a safe and vibrant
Andover that connects the community
through a network of complete streets
and enhances the town's Civic campus on
both sides of Route 6 at its heart
we envision Civic investment in
infrastructure that acknowledges and
takes measures to address climate
change over the next decade and over
will continue to integrate thoughtful
development throughout Town balance with
conservation of natural or cultural
natural resources that are essential to
the realization of this
Vision so this is the The Guiding
statement that will that will form the
backbone of the plan of conservation
development as we write it now you'll
know we have six we envision
statements those we envision statements
are basically form six themes six major
topic areas and what we have done to
start our next phase of the plan of
conservation and development is we have
broken out each of those six we envision
statements and will start to establish
goals and policies and actions that are
in each of those categories so we start
with the we envision um statement about
housing educational recreational and
Civic opportunities and we'll be
beginning to talk about elements that
make that out including our housing our
school system parks on W government and
that sort of thing um and and so on
we'll we'll do this with the the
affordable housing one um looking at
seniors and downsizers new
residents similarly about natural
resources and cultural um resources
looking at Farm viability open space
acquisition stewardship historic
preservation and other conservation
efforts with economic development
targeting businesses location regulatory
adjustments to encourage these
things and then the last two safe and
vibrant Handover that looks at um
complete streets again um building on
our complete streets plan focusing on
bike and pedestrian um connections and
making sure that roads are safe for all
users uh and and highlighting our Trail
connections within and Beyond
and then looking at the the
infrastructure um the Civic campus
investment that this fa facility are
roads Bridges culs and things like that
um building on the sustainable
Connecticut public water infrastructure
all of those things so this is sort of
yet to come we have established the
vision we have sort of split this up
into workable pieces um for topical
discussion and for identification of
goals and this is where we're going next
the next 6 to n months is going to being
spent in these six topic areas starting
to flesh out those individual goals and
actions a couple of quick um takeaways
and and Jed and Eric talked a little bit
about some of these um already from our
survey from our discussions you know
Andor continues to be a great place to
live to go to school um and to to to
thrive throughout all life stages um
we're doing great things with complete
streets with a recreation field
improvements um and are continued to
working on those things people are
concerned about cost of living about um
loss of of character that may come with
the economic growth that is necessary to
address some of those cost of living
concerns um we have a clear lack of
housing not only for new residents but
also a growing concern from existing
residents young families downsizers and
the range of housing opportunities and
again while the the trends are looking
either stagnant maybe shrinking a little
bit there is some um hope or thought
that our our population is stabilizing
and that there is opportunity to
continue to to grow as we go
forward that's where we are right now
again this is a work in progress um
there's been a lot of work to this point
thanks to the work of planning the
zoning thanks to all of you participa in
the survey and in conversations like
this and we will absolutely look towards
continued conversation again over the
next six to n months as we start digging
into some of those very specific goals
when we start talking about what are we
going to do for housing what are we
going to do for roads what are we going
to do for complete streets what are we
going to do for business growth all
those topics will be fleshed out over
the next over the next year or so so
that's it for me questions
comments um yeah so great presentation
by the way lot of the
uh process um with the Conservation
Commission we've been working very
closely on you know National resource
inventory and looking at the open space
and I think one of the greatest
challenges looking at you know some of
the responses in some of the areas to
focus on is along that L six quarter
that is obviously a major transportation
quarter identified as a major area of
economic growth but uh that's also where
the Hot River courp system is which is a
very unique natural resource for for um
both natural resources uh for wildlife
and for weapons and various habitats but
also for recreational use obviously the
trails and it's actually a tail of sort
of two sides of Route Six the north side
is where the flood plane is and where a
lot of the resources are concentrated
which is very different from the South
Side um where uh it's more forested more
upet it's a different sort of ecosystem
uh so I see that as one of the
challenges of looking how to balance
projected growth along that Corridor
with preservation of the natural
resources the agricultural areas along
that uh that system especially on that
South Side uh and I think as as you go
forward with the process one of the
things I think that will be important as
we look at because we tend to look at
these things for example in the
Conservation Commission we've been
looking very narrowly focused on the
natural resources and conservation
others maybe looking at Recreation or
Economic Development or various you know
like that is where do we see um mandates
cross purposes I'll use the terms where
we're recommending that this is an area
for preservation while so in Economic
Development recommend that is an area
for commercial growth or so we have to
look at that um often times the
solutions to that is really the where
and how those develop but I think that
making sure that we just don't put all
the pieces together without doing a
little bit of an analysis of where those
uh poten poal conflict areas are so that
we can have some healthy discussions
about how to resolve
those any other questions or comments
from
anybody I'd really like to thank the
zoning commission and John for getting
us up to this point I think you know
they're going through a great process to
really kind of understand
to
do
as so I it's important that you're all
here it's fantastic um creation on a you
know random random Thursday night from
pa um that we have some many people here
uh so thank you for your time thank you
for your interest and hopefully thank
you in advance for your continued um
participation in these conversations and
I know minus five points on my part
because I didn't introduce myself right
off the bat
don't know me I'm
Jed but I really appreciate you all
coming out tonight I would appreciate
you all taking some more
cookies I get home later up so thank you
very much for attending and can you also
please sign in there is a sign